it's okay look let's see something
positive positively what I've just said
is negative I've just said why you
shouldn't get involved with extremism
why you shouldn't get involved with
terrorism why you shouldn't do illegal
and violent acts what should you do you
should appreciate that you're living in
a democratic country even if it's a
really crappy democratic country I think
one of the questions we all got to deal
with as we grow up is what does it mean
to live in a democracy what are the
opportunities living in a democracy what
are the responsibilities living to
Marcus what are the advantages as well
as the disadvantages and that's
something you don't learn in school in
school they don't teach you how to go to
City Hall and make a difference they
don't they don't teach you any of that
and you know you're probably totaling
really vague like oh you know you're
living in a special country because
there's no civil war here with Isis you
know there are no bombs like you know
you have peace and democracy but what
does democracy really mean what
democracy really means is if you're a
vegan and you want to change the world
you have ways to do it other than
violence you have some option and you
know going to City Hall it can be crappy
and draining and emotionally tough
people at City Hall will say things to
denigrate you and insult you and hurt
your feelings they really will there are
nasty aspects to local politics but you
know ultimately we do have elections we
do have freedom of speech we do have a
free press and as crappy as democracy is
in Canada because I dislike it I don't
like I don't like the Canadian political
system there actually are all these
openings opportunities for you to make
some positive happen and it's say
something even more positive do you
think the people who run Greenpeace are
a bunch of geniuses I don't I think
they're a bunch of idiots do you think
the people who run People for the
Ethical Treatment animals the Green
Party what's another one that's right
there are a couple of their
organizations the Sierra Club you know
foundations that deal with ecology or
animal rights or this connect to them
those people aren't geniuses but they
know better than to to burn down a
slaughterhouse they know better than to
try to smash up a fur farm they're
people who are making a positive
difference and you can too i think you
can do better you know I it does
in recognizing that those people are
kind of stupid you have to recognize the
same time you know okay if we could get
10 smart people together we can do
better than the Green Party we can do
better than Greenpeace and that's not
short term that's long term that's over
ten years or what have you but that
potential is there that hope is there
and that is part of democracy
fundamentally that's completely built on
democracy when you are living in a
dictatorship when i was living in laos
there's a really small example any kind
of political organization means you go
to prison there was sorry i hope i hope
this is a fun anecdote for you i knew a
schoolteacher she was teaching English
at a at a school in Laos and they
decided to have a celebration for Earth
Day you know this holiday earth day they
had the kids get out their paints and
paint pictures of trees ecological
messages and write in English because it
was the English class happy Earth Day
save the Bears save the elephants this
kind of thing the kids painted these and
held them up and they walked from one
school property to another school
property the city carrying their school
projects all put in prison for an
illegal political protest I'm not joking
they were put in prison the teacher was
detained and interrogated the principal
of the school was taken in deteriorated
real talk that's dictatorship that's the
difference between a democracy and
dictatorship okay uh-huh they weren't
they weren't even protesting they were
literally carrying their school projects
which was painting a poster about
ecology from one place to another in
Laos again louses a communist
dictatorship they threatened to kill me
they kicked me out of the country i had
my own experience with politics there
and i did I nevertheless did I did
advocate for ecological change there in
my small polite way I did try to make a
positive difference in that country I
knew a guy it's not worth saying how I
know these people some people tried to
form a club not political at all they
tried to form a club for the owners of
Volkswagen cars so I people on old
secondhand Volkswagens in Laos they did
not get the permission of the Communist
Party they did not get the government's
permission to form a club for Volkswagen
thrown in prison thrown in prison for
having a legal political organization
okay so on a deep level when I talk
about like understanding democracy and
what it means to you what
responsibilities what opportunities of
course you can take it for granted
because we're all raised to take it for
granted were raised with a fundamentally
kind of racist narrative of the
superiority of the British Empire and of
British culture and that everything in
Canada is just wonderful because of
British culture meanwhile don't look at
First Nations don't look at you know
that side of it don't look at the actual
colonial history but this idea that just
because we have a parliament everything
in our society is better and it's almost
the opposite because we have a
parliament there is an onus on you
there's an obligation on you to figure
out for yourself how to make a pause the
difference in the world democratically
and for vegans there's good and bad that
comes with it but i hope i really hope
we can at least in the same sense that
you know there used to be real political
organizations about alcohol like Mothers
Against Drunk drunk driving at one time
that was no joke people getting
politically organized try to discourage
alcoholism and drunk driving like back
in the 1980s that was still a big issue
because the government didn't really
care that much about drunk driving and
they had a whole series of legal changes
related to drunk driving alcohol there
were actually yeah sure Hume to my high
school every year ins in a presentation
right so why doesn't have that exists
for veganism because we suck no
seriously so that's a good example
mothers against drunk driving and the
passengers could say there were also
organizations like that for about
cigarettes about trying to get the
government to change its rules and
cigarettes I always say that I think
mothers against drunk driving the reason
why they're less impressive today is
that they want like now the government
is completely against drunk driving and
all the legal changes they want it got
made they won so now they can shut up
and that's also something we don't think
about as vegans we haven't even thought
through the possibility of winning but
in a Democratic Society when you win
then the struggle is over you don't have
to have organizations that are against
slavery forever you don't have to have
you know like protests on the street
about drunk driving forever you can form
an organization that achieves its goals
in Parliament
and does things like visiting school
kids to give them lectures about drunk
driving sure Mothers Against Drunk
Driving there are a success story but
they also get to fade out they become
less important because they've succeeded
yeah maybe two hundred years from now
for me